==========
Developers
==========

This page collects everything maintainer-facing: how to set up a development
environment, run the tests, build the documentation strictly, the versioning
scheme, the release process, and the policy for opening issues and pull
requests.

If you only want to *use* SoftMobility, see :doc:`installation` and the
tutorials and examples instead.

Setting up a development environment
====================================

Start from one of the user-install recipes in :doc:`installation` (either
``venv`` or ``conda``) so the package itself is installed in editable mode
(``pip install -e .``). Then add the development tools:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install -r requirements-dev.txt

This pulls in ``ruff`` (linting), ``isort``, ``pytest`` (+ ``pytest-cov``,
``coverage``, ``codecov``), ``pre-commit`` and ``pre-commit-hooks``,
``nbstripout``, ``sphinx`` with the documentation extensions
(``sphinx_rtd_theme``, ``sphinx-copybutton``, ``numpydoc``, ``ipython``),
``twine``, and ``pypdf`` (used by the figstyle tests to assert PDF
output is vector-only).

Pre-commit hooks
----------------

The repository ships with a ``.pre-commit-config.yaml``. Install the hooks
once per clone:

.. code-block:: bash

    pre-commit install

The same checks run in CI via ``.github/workflows/pre-commit.yml`` on every
push and pull request.

Running the tests
=================

From the repository root:

.. code-block:: bash

    pytest

The GitHub Actions matrix in ``.github/workflows/testing.yml`` runs the test
suite across all supported Python versions on every push and pull request,
so a local single-Python ``pytest`` run is enough — there is no need to set
up a multi-Python rig locally.

Building the documentation
==========================

For everyday work, the short build is enough:

.. code-block:: bash

    make -C docs html
    open docs/build/html/index.html        # macOS
    xdg-open docs/build/html/index.html    # Linux

Before opening a pull request that touches docstrings or
``docs/source/*.rst``, run the same strict build that CI runs. It treats
warnings as errors and fails on broken cross-references, so any surprise is
caught locally:

.. code-block:: bash

    make -C docs clean
    sphinx-build -W -b html docs/source docs/build/html

This mirrors ``.github/workflows/docs.yml``.

Versioning
==========

The package version is **not** stored in any source file by hand. It is
computed at install time by `Versioneer
<https://github.com/python-versioneer/python-versioneer>`_ from
``git describe --tags``.

Configuration lives in ``setup.cfg``:

.. code-block:: ini

    [versioneer]
    VCS = git
    style = pep440-post
    versionfile_source = softmobility/_version.py
    versionfile_build = softmobility/_version.py
    tag_prefix = v

What this means in practice:

- The tag prefix is ``v``. A tag named ``v1.2.3`` becomes the version
  ``1.2.3``.
- The style is ``pep440-post``. A development install (built from a working
  tree that is past the most recent tag) reports a version of the form
  ``1.0.0.post27+g0691c69``: the latest tag, the number of commits past it,
  and the short commit hash. A working tree with uncommitted changes appends
  ``.dirty``.
- The file ``softmobility/_version.py`` is auto-generated by Versioneer and
  must **not** be edited by hand. Versioneer rewrites it during the build.

Quick sanity check at any point:

.. code-block:: bash

    python -c "import softmobility as sm; print(sm.__version__)"

Cutting a release
=================

Releases are made through the GitHub *Releases* UI. Creating a release
creates a git tag, which Versioneer picks up as the new version, and the
``.github/workflows/publish-pypi.yml`` workflow runs on the
``release: created`` event to upload the sdist and wheel to PyPI.

Step by step:

1. Make sure ``main`` is green on CI (testing + docs workflows) and that
   ``docs/source/release-history.rst`` is up to date with the changes that
   will ship.
2. On GitHub: *Releases → Draft a new release*.
3. **Tag name**: ``vX.Y.Z`` (PEP 440, with the leading ``v`` so Versioneer's
   ``tag_prefix = v`` strips it). **Target**: ``main``.
4. Fill in the release notes and click *Publish release*. GitHub creates the
   tag.
5. The ``publish-pypi.yml`` workflow runs automatically:

   .. code-block:: bash

       python setup.py sdist bdist_wheel
       twine upload dist/*

   The upload uses the repository secret ``PYPI_API_TOKEN`` (a PyPI API
   token with the ``pypi-`` prefix and upload scope on the
   ``soft-mobility`` project). Watch the workflow run from the *Actions*
   tab to confirm it succeeded.
6. After the release, refresh the local checkout (``git pull --tags``) so
   Versioneer reports the new version.

Reporting issues
================

Bugs and feature requests are tracked in the GitHub issue tracker:
https://github.com/C0PEP0D/SoftMobility/issues.

When opening a bug report, please include:

- A minimal, self-contained example that reproduces the problem.
- The version of SoftMobility:
  ``python -c "import softmobility as sm; print(sm.__version__)"``.
- Your Python version (``python -V``) and operating system.
- The full traceback (or the unexpected output, with a description of what
  you expected instead).

For feature requests, describe the use case first; the API design follows
from the use case.

Submitting pull requests
========================

The high-level flow:

1. Fork the repository and clone your fork.
2. Create a feature branch off ``main``:

   .. code-block:: bash

       git checkout -b name-of-your-feature

3. Make your changes. Add or update tests for any behaviour change. Update
   the documentation (docstrings and/or ``docs/source/*.rst``) when the
   public API or user-facing behaviour changes.
4. Before pushing, run the local checks:

   .. code-block:: bash

       ruff check
       pytest
       make -C docs clean
       sphinx-build -W -b html docs/source docs/build/html

5. Commit, push, and open a pull request against ``main`` on the upstream
   repository.

Pull request guidelines:

- Keep the scope narrow. One logical change per PR is easier to review and
  to revert if needed.
- New functionality is expected to come with tests.
- Follow the existing code style. ``ruff`` is the source of truth; ``isort``
  is configured to match.
- The CI matrix runs the tests across all supported Python versions and
  builds the docs strictly. A green CI is required to merge.

Project TODOs
=============

Local, in-progress notes and TODOs live in ``TODO.md`` at the repository
root. The file is consumed by the VS Code `Todo Tree
<https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Gruntfuggly.todo-tree>`_
extension, which surfaces ``TODO`` and ``FIXME`` markers across the
codebase. ``TODO.md`` is intentionally kept out of the README and the user-
facing documentation so it does not become a substitute for the GitHub
issue tracker.
